% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[
  11pt,
  a4paper,
]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
  \setmainfont[]{Lato}
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage{xcolor}
\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\IfFileExists{bookmark.sty}{\usepackage{bookmark}}{\usepackage{hyperref}}
\hypersetup{
  pdftitle={A new method for modelling electroglottographic data},
  pdfauthor={Stefano Coretta},
  hidelinks,
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}
% \urlstyle{same} % disable monospaced font for URLs
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{5}
\usepackage{cleveref}
\usepackage[]{natbib}
\bibliographystyle{unified}

\title{A new method for modelling electroglottographic data}
\author{Stefano Coretta}
\date{}

\usepackage[absolute]{textpos}

\begin{document}
\begin{textblock}{3}(0.2,0.2)
  \textcolor{lightgray}{v0.1.9000 (2019/04/30)}
\end{textblock}
\maketitle

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics{./img/egg-setup.pdf}
  \caption{A schematics of the electroglottograph. A transverse section of the neck is shown with open glottis (on the left) and closed glottis (on the right). The electric field passing through the neck is represented by lines. When the vocal folds are apart, the opening distorts the electric field and impedance increases.}
  \label{f:egg-setup}
\end{figure}

The position of the vocal folds within the oral tract makes their
investigation difficult. Direct observation of the activity of the
larynx via invasive methods, like laryngeoscopy, brings with it a series
of practical drawbacks. Among other methods for obtaining information on
glottal activity is electroglottography. Electroglottography, or EGG
\citep{fabre1957}, is a technique that measures the degree of contact
between the vocal folds (the Vocal Folds Contact Area, VFCA). A high
frequency low voltage electrical current is sent through two electrodes
which are in contact with the surface of the neck, one on each side of
the thyroid cartilage (\Cref{f:egg-setup}). Impedance of this current is
modulated by the VFCA, and greater vocal folds contact creates less
impedance. The amplitude is inversely correlated with VFCA and
impedance, so that higher amplitude values indicate a greater contact
area \citep{titze1990}. The EGG unit registers the current impedance and
converts it to relative amplitude values. The time-developing amplitude
signal thus provides us with information on the changes in VFCA, i.e.~on
properties of vocal folds vibration (voicing).

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics{./img/degg-signal.pdf}
  \caption{The electroglottographic signal (EGG) with corresponding first derivative (dEGG).}
  \label{f:egg}
\end{figure}

A glottal cycle can be described in terms of two phases
\citep{childers1985, hampala2016}: (a) a contacting phase, in which the
vocal folds are approaching each other, (b) a de-contacting phase, in
which the vocal folds move apart from each other. Transversal to this
two-phase description, the glottal cycle can be described in terms of
whether the glottis is closed or not. According to this classification,
the cycle can be divided into (1) a closed phase, in which the glottis
is completely closed and glottal flow is 0 (in some contexts this phase
could be absent, like in breathy voicing), and (2) an open phase, in
which there is no complete contact between the vocal folds. The timing
of these phases can be approximated from the EGG signal, as demonstrated
by both experimental and modelling work \citep{hampala2016}. An example
EGG signal is provided in \Cref{f:egg}.

Two important landmarks of glottal movement are the closing instant (the
timepoint of glottal complete closure) and the opening instant (the
moment in which the glottis first opens). These points delimit the open
and closed phases of a glottal cycle. The ratio of the closed phase
relative to the total cycle duration, the closed quotient, has been used
as an index of phonation type. Modal voice has higher close quotient
values than breathy voice, and lower values than creaky voice. One
method for the detection of the closing and opening instants is based on
the first derivative of the EGG signal (the dEGG, see \Cref{f:egg}).
\citet{herbst2017}, however, showed that this method returns values that
are just a surrogate of the actual articulatory movements, due to the
complex anatomy of the vocal folds, and that there are no clear
contacting and decontact instants, but rather intervals.
\citet{herbst2017} call this EGG-based closed quotient the `contact
quotient' and recommend to keep it distinct from the closed quotient
obtained from direct observation of the vocal folds.

As an alternative to the contact quotient, \citet{herbst2010} propose
the wavegram, a visualisation method which does not reduce the EGG
signal to a single value and thus suffers less from the limitations of
the contact quotient. The wavegram exploits information from the whole
signal to obtain an image of vocal folds activity. A wavegram is a 3D
representation of the EGG signal developing in time. Its structure is
similar to that of a classical phonetic spectrogram. The \emph{x}-axis
indicates the temporal sequence of individual glottal cycles. The
\emph{y}-axis represents the time within each glottal cycle, normalised
between 0 and 1. Finally, the normalised amplitude of the signal
corresponds to different colour intensities. Differences in intensity
along the \emph{x}-axis indicate changes in glottal activity. The
procedure for constructing a wavegram is given in \Cref{f:wavegram}. A
wavegram can be produced for the EGG signal and for any of its
transformations, like the dEGG.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics{./img/wavegram.png}
  \caption{The wavegram. Created by Christian T. Herbst under a CC BY-SA 3.0 license.}
  \label{f:wavegram}
\end{figure}

A possible limitation of the wavegram method is that it is intended for
a qualitative analysis based on visual inspection. However, wavegram
data can be modelled using generalised additive models (GAMs,
\citealt{hastie1986, zuur2012, wood2017}). GAMs are a family of
generalised models which can fit non-linear effects by additive
combinations of smoothing splines. The flexibility of GAMs allows
researchers to generate a fitted wavegram based on data from multiple
repetitions of a single speaker and from multiple speakers. Random
effects can also be included to account for idiosyncratic differences.
Moreover, the potential for overfitting is reduced by a smoothing
penalty parameter, which constraints the maximum number of basis
functions used to construct the smoothing splines. This paper introduces
wavegram GAMs as a way to quantitatively assess wavegram data. First,
results from a pilot study which informally evaluates the proposed
method are presented (\Cref{s:pilot}). \Cref{s:voicing} illustrates how
to conduct a wavegram GAM analysis of dEGG data through a practical
example in which the wavegrams of vowels followed by voiceless and
voiced stops are compared. Finally, \Cref{s:limits} discusses
limitations of the current implementation of the method and future
directions.

\hypertarget{pilot-study}{%
\section{Pilot study}\label{pilot-study}}

\label{s:pilot}

Synchronised audio and EGG data were obtained from 5 trained
phoneticians, who were asked to produce sustained tokens of /a/ with
modal and breathy voice. The data was collected using a Glottal
Enterprises EG2-PCX2 electroglottograph and a Movo LV4-O2 Lavalier
microphone, at a sample rate of 44100 Hz (16-bit). The acquisition of
the signals was controlled with Audacity running on a MacBook Pro
(Retina, 13-inch, Mid 2014). The placement of the electrodes strap was
checked with the height indicator on the EGG unit. Each participant
uttered 10 consecutive tokens of a sustained /a/ in modal voice,
followed by 10 tokens of a sustained breathy /a/. All subsequent data
processing was performed in Praat \citep{boersma2018}. The onset and
offset of each token were detected with an automatic procedure which
finds voiced and unvoiced intervals (\texttt{To\ TextGrid\ (vuv)}). The
dEGG wavegram data was extracted from the first 8 glottal cycles of a
500 ms window, centred around the mid-point of each token. A glottal
cycle was arbitrarily defined as the interval between two consecutive
EGG minima (cf.~with \citealt{herbst2010} for an alternative algorythm).
From each glottal cycle, the relative amplitude of the dEGG signal was
extracted every 10 samples.

A generalised additive mixed model (GAMM) was fitted to the data to
statistically assess differences in vocal fold activity between modal
and breathy voicing (see \citealt{soskuthy2017} and
\citealt{wieling2018} for a practical introduction to fitting GAMs in
R). The following terms were included: the amplitude of the dEGG signal
as the outcome variable, an interaction factor with language and
phonation as a parametric term, a smooth over the normalised time of the
beginning of the glottal cycle (as the proportion of the time relative
to the entire token duration) and one over the normalised time of the
sample within the glottal cycle (as the proportion of the time relative
to the duration of the glottal cycle), two difference smooths over
normalised time of the glottal cycle onset and normalised sample time
using a by-variable with the language/phonation factor, a tensor product
interaction between normalised cycle time and normalised sample time,
and the same tensor product interaction with a language/phonation
by-variable. Finally, inter-speaker differences were modelled with a
by-speaker factor smooth over normalised cycle time. A first-order
autoregressive (AR1) model was included to deal with the relatively high
auto-correlation in the residuals.

\Cref{f:surface-p} shows the modelled wavegrams of modal and breathy
tokens. Since the tokens were produced with sustained phonation, no
appreciable change within each wavegram can be observed. However, the
comparison of the wavegram of modal voice with that of breathy voice
reveals differences between the two phonation types. As a general trend,
the dEGG maximum and dEGG minimum are achieved later within the glottal
cycle in breathy voicing relative to modal voicing. Moreover,
differences in velocity of closing and opening movements of the vocal
folds are signalled by the relative widths of the red-coloured bands
(around the dEGG maximum) and the blue-coloured bands (around the dEGG
minimum). While in modal voicing the blue band is wider, the red band is
in breathy voicing, indicating that the velocity into and out of the
beginning of the closed phase is slower in breathy voicing. According to
the approximate significance of the smooth terms, phonation has an
effect on the shape of the wavegram as expected (\emph{F}(14.681) =
3.187, Ref.EDF = 19.027, \emph{p} \textless{} 0.001).

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{2019-wavegram_files/figure-latex/surface-p-1} \caption{Fitted wavegram of modal and breathy phonation (\Cref{s:pilot}). The horizontal lines represent the dEGG maximum (solid line) and minimum (dashed line).}\label{f:surface-p}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{wavegram-of-vowels-followed-by-voiceless-vs.-voiced-stops}{%
\section{Wavegram of vowels followed by voiceless vs.~voiced
stops}\label{wavegram-of-vowels-followed-by-voiceless-vs.-voiced-stops}}

\label{s:voicing}

This section further illustrates the use of wavegram GAMs by discussing
a dynamic analysis of changes in vocal folds activity during the
production of vowels followed by voiceless vs.~voiced stops in Italian
and Polish. EGG data was obtained from 9 Italian speakers and 6 Polish
speakers. The procedures for data processing and analysis were the same
as with the pilot study, with the exception that data was extracted from
every glottal cycle within the whole duration of the vowel. The vowel
onset and offset were identified as the appearance and disappearance of
higher formant structure respectively \citep{machac2009}.

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{2019-wavegram_files/figure-latex/surface-1} \caption{Fitted wavegram of vowels followed by voiceless and voiced stops in Italian and Polish (\Cref{s:voicing}).}\label{f:surface}
\end{figure}

\Cref{f:surface} shows the modelled wavegrams of vowels followed by
voiceless (left) and voiced stops (right), in Italian (top) and Polish
(bottom). The wavegrams indicate that vocal folds activity changes
towards the end of the vowel if the following consonant is voiceless,
both in Italian and Polish. The glottal activity along the second half
of vowels followed by voiced stops is, on the other hand, more stable.
Moreover, the change in activity is initiated earlier in Italian (at
around 60\% into the vowel) than in Polish (at about 80\%). What the
wavegrams show is that glottal opening increases towards the end of the
vowel, in anticipation of the open glottis typical of voiceless stops
(and consonants more in general).

Another difference between the two languages concerns the initial
voiceless stop (/p/). The change observed between 50 and 70\% into the
glottal cycle at the beginning of the vowel, which indicates a
transition from a more spread glottis, is more extreme in Polish than in
Italian. This means that phonation at vowel onset is slightly breathier
in the former. Such difference is compatible with the finding that
Polish voiceless stops have on average a longer VOT than Italian stops.

The observation of increased glottal opening in the production of vowels
followed by voiceless stops in Italian is further compatible with the
reported presence of pre-aspiration (breathy or voiceless) in Italian
geminate stops
\citep{stevens2004, stevens2004a, stevens2010, stevens2010b, stevens2014a}.
Increased glottal spreading during vocal fold vibration is the logical
precursor of voiceless pre-aspiration. The fact that voiceless
pre-aspiration is not fully developed in Italian singleton voiceless
stops offers interesting insights concerning the duration of voiceless
stops and the emergence of pre-aspiration.

It is known that voiceless stops have longer closure durations than
voiced stops. \citet{lisker1974} argues that, in English voiceless
stops, closure occurs not long after the spreading gesture is initiated
in order to avoid the emergence of full pre-aspiration. There are,
however, varieties of English with pre-aspiration in stops and
fricatives \citep{gordeeva2007, nance2013, hejna2015a}. The question
arises as to how glottal spreading in vowels in the context of voiceless
stops can lead to the emergence of pre-aspiration in some cases. One of
the common conceptions is that pre-aspiration arises when closure
duration decreases while glottal spread remains. \citet{nichasaide1985},
however, claims that the appearance of pre-aspiration (in the form of
glottal spread before stop closure) diachronically precedes closure
shortening. \citet{stevens2014} further present experimental evidence
from Italian that pre-aspiration and closure shorting are independent.
Moreover, the presence of pre-aspiration increased the total duration of
the VC sequence.

What can be learnt from this is that, once breathyness/pre-aspiration
arises, there are two possible scenarios: according to one possible
path, as noted by \citet{lisker1974}, pre-aspiration is prevented by
achieving stop closure earlier (thus increasing the stop closure
duration); according to the other path, pre-aspiration can be enhanced,
with subsequent closure shortening, as in the arguments by
\citet{nichasaide1985} and \citet{stevens2014}.

  \bibliography{linguistics}

\end{document}
